PEP 792: Project status markers in the simple index (#4432)
python/peps: peps/pep-0792.rst

PEP: 792
Title: Project status markers in the simple index
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>,

>         Facundo Tuesca <facundo.tuesca@trailofbits.com>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Facundo Tuesca <facundo.tuesca@trailofbits.com>,
```

Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/79356

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussions-To: Pending
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 08-Apr-2025

> Post-History: `03-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79356/>`__

Reviewer: Reduce diff for future lines
```suggestion
Post-History: `03-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79356/>`__,
```

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a standardized set of project status markers, as well
as a mechanism for communicating those markers in the HTML and JSON

> simple indices.

Reviewer: Can we disambiguate in the abstract to "distribution project" or the correct term in the context of package indices? I would tend to read "project status" here as relating to the source project, i.e. `pyproject.toml`.

Author: This could be my misunderstanding, but I thought "project" _was_ the disambiguating term: the PyPUG glossary defines both "distribution package" and "project," but the former appears to refer to a single instance (i.e. file) while the latter refers to the thing that gets packaged into distribution(s) and appears on PyPI.

Refs:

* https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Project
* https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Distribution-Package

(Apologies if I'm getting this wrong, though.)

Reviewer: My view is that a "project" is nominally tied to a source tree / `pyproject.toml` (etc), and so when discussing some form of project status indicator, my expectation would be for it to relate to the project as a collection of sources. Note from the glossary "*that is intended to be packaged into a Distribution*".

The ideal here would be a term that captures 'project as a collection of distribution packages, as represented on a package index'. I recall some discussion with @pfmoore on the distinction between various types of 'projects' (in the context of PyPI pages), I'm not sure if any clarity was found there.

Author: I've gone with "index-supplied" as a stopgap, but happy to change further.

Rationale and Motivation
========================

The "status" of a project is an important piece of metadata, made more important

> by growth in both the breadth and depth of the Python packaging ecosystem.

Reviewer: or 'scope', etc. Not sure which dimensions 'breadth' vs 'depth' would cover!
```suggestion
by growth in both the expanse of the Python packaging ecosystem.
```

Author: "Breadth and depth" was meant to be "number of packages" and "depth of dependency trees" respectively, but I can rephrase to make that clearer!

Author: Went with "size and complexity," but I'm happy to rephrase as needed.

> Both humans and tools use project statuses (or proxies for status,
> such as recent activity) to determine whether the project is maintained or
> otherwise suitable for consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Project status (or proxies such as recent activity) is useful to know in
determining whether a project is maintained or otherwise suitable for consumption.
```

Python packaging has at least three different mechanisms for communicating
the "status" of a project:

> 1. Distributions can include *trove classifiers* in their metadata, as

Reviewer: The [PyPA glossary](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Distribution-Package) uses 'distribution package' instead of the unadorned 'distribution[s]'. I'd suggest renaming to the PyPA term, either here on first use or throughout. It is more verbose, though.

Author: Will do!

   classifier to indicate that the distribution's project is inactive.

   Trove classifiers are flexible, but also come with significant limitations:
   they're machine-readable and are rendered on indices like PyPI, but
   they also require the maintainer to push one or more *new* distributions
   each time they wish to update their project's development status.
   Furthermore, because distributions are *de facto* immutable in the Python
   packaging ecosystem, older distributions can't have their classifiers
   updated to reflect the current status of the project.

2. Indices can mark distributions and releases as "yanked", as originally
   specified in :pep:`592`. Yanked distributions are not considered
   eligible for dependency resolution.

   When a distribution has been yanked, it is marked with ``data-yanked``
   in the HTML index and with ``yanked: bool | str`` in the JSON index.
   Additionally, indices like PyPI will hide yanked distributions by default
   and will render them with a notice when the user navigates directly to them.

   Yanking is machine-readable like trove classifiers, but is single-purpose

>    rather than general-purpose: users can specify a free-form "yank reason,"
>    but the semantics of yanking are fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   rather than general-purpose: users can specify a free-text reason for
   yanking a given distribution package, but the semantics of yanking are
   fixed, and no reliable inference of project status can be made by a machine
   based upon that free-text reason.
```

3. PyPI itself has *project statuses*, which apply to the entire project
   (i.e., all releases and distributions). Project statuses have both
   maintainer- and index-admin-controllable states:

   * PyPI administrators can "quarantine" a project. Quarantine behaves like
     a strengthened yank: the project remains entirely uninstallable while

>      quarantined.

Reviewer: Is this by default, or does requesting an exact version stil work?

Author: Sorry, could you clarify? I believe quarantine affects an entire project at once and always has; admins can't quarantine a single version at a time. 

(Maybe this question was about yanking but placed in the wrong spot?)

Reviewer: > "the project remains entirely uninstallable while quarantined."

When a project is yanked, I can override it by requesting a specific version. Describing quarantine in terms of yanking raised the question of if that is possible. I have interacted with yanked packages before but never quarantined (to my knowledge), so I have no idea how it works (or even when it was added, I don't remember a PEP).

>    * Project maintainers can "archive" a project. Archiving a project

Reviewer: PyPI verbiage?
```suggestion
   * Project owners can "archive" a project. Archiving a project
```

Author: Thanks for catching that!

     disables new release and distribution uploads to that project,

>      but otherwise has no effect on the project's downloadability.

Reviewer: [downloadability](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=downloadability%2Cdownload&year_start=1800&year_end=2022&corpus=en&smoothing=3) isn't a word (in common usage).
```suggestion
     but otherwise has no effect on the ability to download a project.
```

   Project statuses are machine-readable *in principle*, but are not currently
   exposed via any of PyPI's APIs. Instead, PyPI renders project statuses on

>    each project's user-facing (i.e. non-index) HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   each project's user-facing (i.e. non-index) webpage.
```

> In summary: there are multiple ways to communicate the "status" of a project in
> Python packaging, but none of these mechanisms are *simultaneously* (1)
> machine-readable, (2) general, (3) index-agnostic, and (4) updatable across
> the entire project (instead of per-release or per-distribution).

Reviewer: A suggested rephrasing. A numbered list should be formatted as a list rather than inline prose. 

I don't think I follow what the 'general' criterion is meant to cover?
```suggestion
In summary, there are multiple ways to communicate the "status" of a project in
Python packaging. However, none of them satisfy the four characteristics we desire.
There is no current project status indicator that is machine-readable, general, 
index-agnostic, and applies to the entire project, instead of per-release or
per-distribution.
```

Author: Thanks!

"General" refers to the idea that project status markers, as proposed, are conceptually extensible. So they're like classifiers in that regard (since new classifiers can always be added) and *unlike* yanking in that regard (since yanking has a fixed meaning).

Author: (I recognize that's a murky word though, I'm very open to a better phrasing if my explanation makes sense! Maybe "future-proofed" or "extensible"?)

Reviewer: I appreciate all are currently defined in the positive, but perhaps "single purpose" as a no = good?

> .. csv-table::
>     :header: "Mechanism", "Machine-readable?", "General?", "Index-agnostic?", "Project updatable?"
> 
>     "Trove classifiers", "✅", "✅", "✅", "❌"
>     "Yanking", "✅", "❌", "✅", "✅"
>     "Project statuses", "✅", "✅", "❌", "✅"

Reviewer: For this I would consider a regular simple table
```suggestion
================= ================ ======= ============== ============
Mechanism         Machine-readable General Index-agnostic Project-wide
================= ================ ======= ============== ============
Trove classifiers ✅               ✅      ✅            ❌
Yanking           ✅               ❌      ✅            ✅
Project statuses  ✅               ✅      ❌            ✅
================= ================ ======= ============== ============
```

Author: Thanks!

This PEP proposes adopting PyPI's project statuses as an index-agnostic
mechanism, satisfying all four conditions.

Specification
=============

This PEP specifies two aspects: a set of project status markers,
as well as their presentation in the standard HTML and JSON indices.

Project status markers
----------------------

> This PEP proposes the following project status markers.

Reviewer: I can't find anywhere in _Specification_ defining state transitions between status markers. E.g. an explicit note that one may un-deprecate a project, etc.

It may also be good to note the expected interface for markers (e.g. project owners or admins can change at any time per-project), though this probably is a little overkill.

Author: > I can't find anywhere in Specification defining state transitions between status markers. E.g. an explicit note that one may un-deprecate a project, etc.

One of the follow-on discussions I had with the PyPI folks is that this PEP should probably avoid defining state transitions directly, since that begins to fall into permissions/index-specific behavior. But as a midway point I could note which statuses are conceptually "owner-level" versus "admin-level" (e.g. "archived" vs. "quarantined").

> It may also be good to note the expected interface for markers (e.g. project owners or admins can change at any time per-project), though this probably is a little overkill.

Yeah, I _think_ this would push too far into index policy 😅 -- I can see a reasonable scenario in which a non-PyPI index might want admins to be able to archive or deprecate projects, while that's not something that PyPI itself would likely do.

Reviewer: My intent here wasn't defining the actor, but just the state -- currently, it is unclear if an archived project can be un-archived, or a deprecated project un-deprecated, etc. I think a line saying that there are no restrictions in the PEP on changing status would help. You could maybe add a further line to note that indices may have further policies on the 'quarrantine' status as a special case?

Author: Sounds good, will do!

Author: I'm going to add some language that'll hopefully clarify that states can be set and un-set, but that the PEP leaves it up to the index to determine which "principals" can do what (i.e. whether maintainers or admins can deprecate, archive, etc.)

A project **MUST** have exactly one project status marker at any given time.

Indices **MAY** implement any subset of the status markers specified in this

> PEP, as applicable.

Reviewer: An index could chose to implement 0 statuses (legal), but then would fall foul of not having any project status markers.

Side note: would it make sense to add an 'external' or 'mirror' status, for e.g. an index that serves as a private mirror of PyPI but also hosts internal packages? 'active' doesn't quite make sense here.

Author: > An index could chose to implement 0 statuses (legal), but then would fall foul of not having any project status markers.

Ah yeah, this is a vestige of a previous edit (before I added the "active" marker) -- I'll clarify to note that a project always _does_ have a status, since "active" is the implicit status when none is given.

Index semantics: none.

Installer semantics: none.

``archived``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project does not expect to be updated in the future.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's archival.

``quarantined``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered generally unsafe for use, e.g. due to
malware.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST NOT** offer any distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's quarantine, although
  doing so is effectively moot (as the index will not offer any distributions
  for installation).

``deprecated``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered obsolete, and may have been superseded
by another project.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.

> * The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Reviewer: This is the same as 'active' (/status quo), which has semantics: none. Perhaps either list these explicit semantics for 'active', or say that there are no special semantics for an index here?

Author: Thanks, deduping by saying "same as active" makes sense to me here!

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's deprecation.

Status markers in the index APIs
--------------------------------

This PEP defines version 1.4 of the index APIs.

HTML index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`simple repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api-base>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ``pypi:repository-version`` as ``1.4``.
* The index **SHOULD** add an appropriate ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag, with
  a ``content`` of the project's status marker. The index **MAY** choose to omit
  the ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag if the project is marked as ``active``.

For example, the following would be a valid HTML index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as ``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: html

>     :emphasize-lines: 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :emphasize-lines: 5
```

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.4">
        <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="quarantined">
        <title>Links for sampleproject</title>
      </head>
      <body>
        <h1>Links for sampleproject</h1>
      </body>
    </html>

Observe that, per the ``quarantined`` semantics above, the index response
contains no distribution links for the project.

JSON index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`JSON simple index <packaging:simple-repository-api-json>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ``meta.api-version`` as ``1.4``.
* The index **SHOULD** include a ``project-status`` key in the JSON response,
  with a value of the project's status marker. The index **MAY** choose to omit
  the ``project-status`` key if the project is marked as ``active``.

For example, the following would be a valid JSON index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as ``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: json

>     :emphasize-lines: 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :emphasize-lines: 5
```

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "1.4"
      },
      "project-status": "quarantined",
      "alternate-locations": [],
      "files": [],
      "name": "sampleproject",
      "versions": [
        "1.2.0",
        "1.3.0",
        "1.3.1",
        "2.0.0",
        "3.0.0",
        "4.0.0"
      ]
    }

Observe that, like with the HTML index, the JSON response contains no
distribution links for the ``quarantined`` project.

Future Considerations
=====================

This PEP defines only four project status markers: ``active``, ``archived``,
``quarantined``, and ``deprecated``.

Future PEPs (or PyPA standards processes) may define additional project

> status markers, as needed.

Reviewer: Am I right in understanding that further status markers would require a change to the metadata version?

Author: I think so, yeah (I don't feel confident asserting that as a manner of policy, but that seems to be the norm, and would make intuitive sense here). Do you think that makes sense to say explicitly?

Reviewer: Perhaps, as it means that the light-touch process can't be used. Thinking again, given this demands behaviour from both indices and installers, it would require a PEP to add a new 'status marker'. 

On that note, it might be worth adding a line on the behaviour for encountering an unknown marker. It should never happen given metadata versions, I believe, but an explict 'fail' or 'ignore' might be helpful.

A

PEP: 792
Title: Project status markers in the simple index
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>,
        Facundo Tuesca <facundo.tuesca@trailofbits.com>,
Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 08-Apr-2025
Post-History: `03-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79356/>`__,

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a standardized set of project status markers, as well
as a mechanism for communicating those markers in the HTML and JSON
simple indices.

Rationale and Motivation
========================

The "status" of a project is an important piece of metadata, made more important
by growth in both the size and complexity of the Python packaging ecosystem.
Project status (or proxies such as recent activity) is useful to know in
determining whether a project is maintained or otherwise suitable for consumption.

Python packaging has at least three different mechanisms for communicating
the "status" of a project:

> 1. Distribution packages can include *trove classifiers* in their metadata, as

Reviewer 2: Re: https://pypi.org/classifiers/ and https://peps.python.org/pep-0301/
```suggestion
1. Distribution packages can include *Trove classifiers* in their metadata, as
```
